Feat/expressjs extension (#2244)
canonical/charmcraft: docs/tutorial/kubernetes-charm-expressjs.rst

#. Use that to create a rock with Rockcraft.
#. Use that to create a charm with Charmcraft.
#. Use that to test, deploy, configure, etc., your ExpressJS app on a local
   Kubernetes cloud with Juju.
#. Repeat the process, mimicking a real development process.

.. important::

    Should you get stuck or notice issues, please get in touch on
    `Matrix <https://matrix.to/#/#12-factor-charms:ubuntu.com>`_ or
    `Discourse <https://discourse.charmhub.io/>`_

Set things up
-------------

.. include:: /reuse/tutorial/setup_edge.rst
.. |12FactorApp| replace:: ExpressJS

Finally, let's create a new directory for this tutorial and
enter into it:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:create-working-dir]
    :end-before: [docs:create-working-dir-end]
    :dedent: 2

Create the ExpressJS app
-----------------

Start by creating the "Hello, world" ExpressJS app that will be
used for this tutorial.

Install ``npm`` and ``express-generator`` to initialize the ExpressJS module:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:install-init-expressjs]
    :end-before: [docs:install-init-expressjs-end]

>     :dedent: 2

Author: This is related to the express framework and just a warning. It should not be a concern.

Run the ExpressJS app locally
----------------------

First, we need to install the necessary packages for the ExpressJS app so it can run:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:build-expressjs]
    :end-before: [docs:build-expressjs-end]

>     :dedent: 2

Author: This should not affect the tutorial. We are using a pinned version of Express generator and packages get old really quickly in the node world.

archives so they can be downloaded and deployed in the Kubernetes cluster.
Copy the rock:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:skopeo-copy]
    :end-before: [docs:skopeo-copy-end]
    :dedent: 2

.. seealso::

    `Ubuntu manpage | skopeo
    <https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/noble/man1/skopeo.1.html>`_

Create the charm
----------------

From the ``~/expressjs-hello-world`` directory, let's create a new directory
for the charm and change inside it:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:create-charm-dir]
    :end-before: [docs:create-charm-dir-end]
    :dedent: 2

Using the ``expressjs-framework`` profile, Charmcraft will automate the
creation of the files needed for our charm, including a
``charmcraft.yaml``, ``requirements.txt`` and source code for the charm.
The source code contains the logic required to operate the ExpressJS
app.

Initialize a charm named ``expressjs-hello-world``:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:charm-init]
    :end-before: [docs:charm-init-end]

>     :dedent: 2

Reviewer: When I tested the tutorial, I received the following error:
```
ubuntu@charm-dev:~/expressjs-hello-world/charm$ charmcraft init --profile expressjs-framework --name expressjs-hello-world
Usage: charmcraft [options] command [args]...
Try 'charmcraft init -h' for help.

Error: argument --profile: invalid choice: 'expressjs-framework'
(choose from 'simple', 'kubernetes', 'machine', 'flask-framework',
'django-framework', 'go-framework', 'fastapi-framework')
```

I guess the `expressjs-framework` isn't available in Charmcraft `latest/edge` yet?

Author: Oh yes it is not available yet, you need to pack this branch of charmcraft and use that snap.

The files will automatically be created in your working directory.

Check out the contents of ``charmcraft.yaml``:

.. code-block:: bash

    cat charmcraft.yaml

The top of the file should look similar to the following snippet:

.. code-block:: yaml
    :caption: ~/expressjs-hello-world/charm/charmcraft.yaml

    # This file configures Charmcraft.
    # See https://juju.is/docs/sdk/charmcraft-config for guidance.

    name: expressjs-hello-world

    type: charm

    base: ubuntu@24.04

    # the platforms this charm should be built on and run on.
    # you can check your architecture with `dpkg --print-architecture`
    platforms:
      amd64:
      # arm64:
      # ppc64el:
      # s390x:

    # (Required)
    summary: A very short one-line summary of the ExpressJS app.

    ...

> Verify that the ``name`` is ``expressjs-hello-world``. Ensure that ``platforms``
> includes the architecture of your host. If your host uses the ARM architecture,
> open ``charmcraft.yaml`` in a text editor, comment out ``amd64``, and include
> ``arm64`` in ``platforms``.

Reviewer: We updated this text in the other tutorials :)
```suggestion
Verify that the ``name`` is ``expressjs-hello-world``. Ensure that ``platforms``
includes the architecture of your host. Edit the ``platforms`` key in the
project file if required.
```

Let's pack the charm:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:charm-pack]
    :end-before: [docs:charm-pack-end]
    :dedent: 2

.. note::

    ``CHARMCRAFT_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_EXTENSIONS`` is required while the ExpressJS
    extension is experimental.

Depending on your system and network, this step can take several
minutes to finish.

> Once Charmcraft has finished packing the charm, the terminal will
> respond with something similar to
> ``Packed expressjs-hello-world_ubuntu-24.04-amd64.charm``.
> 
> .. note::
> 
>     If you aren't on AMD64 architecture, the name of the ``.charm``
>     file will be different for you.

Reviewer: We updated this text in the other tutorials :)
```suggestion
Once Charmcraft has finished packing the charm, the terminal will
respond with something similar to
``Packed expressjs-hello-world_ubuntu-24.04-<architecture>.charm``.
The file name reflects your system's architecture. After the initial
pack, subsequent charm packings are faster.
```

> Deploy the ExpressJS app
> -----------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy the ExpressJS app
------------------------
```

> A Juju model is needed to handle Kubernetes resources while deploying
> the ExpressJS app. Let's create a new model:

Reviewer: We updated this text in the other tutorials :)
```suggestion
A Juju model is needed to handle Kubernetes resources while deploying
the ExpressJS app. The Juju model holds the app along with any supporting
components. In this tutorial, our model will hold the ExpressJS app, ingress,
and a PostgreSQL database.

Let's create a new model:
```

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:add-juju-model]
    :end-before: [docs:add-juju-model-end]
    :dedent: 2

> If you aren't on a host with the AMD64 architecture, you will need to include
> to include a constraint to the Juju model to specify your architecture.
> 
> Set the Juju model constraints with:

Reviewer: We updated this text in the other tutorials :)
```suggestion
Constrain the Juju model to your architecture:
```

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:add-model-constraints]
    :end-before: [docs:add-model-constraints-end]
    :dedent: 2

Now let's use the OCI image we previously uploaded to deploy the ExpressJS
app. Deploy using Juju by specifying the OCI image name with the
``--resource`` option:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:deploy-expressjs-app]
    :end-before: [docs:deploy-expressjs-app-end]
    :dedent: 2

It will take a few minutes to deploy the ExpressJS app. You can monitor its
progress with:

.. code-block:: bash

    juju status --watch 2s

It can take a couple of minutes for the app to finish the deployment.
Once the status of the App has gone to ``active``, you can stop watching
using :kbd:`Ctrl` + :kbd:`C`.

> .. seealso::
> 
>     See more: :external+juju:ref:`Juju | juju status <command-juju-status>`

Reviewer: We updated this admonition in the other tutorials :)
```suggestion
.. tip::

    To monitor your deployment, keep a ``juju status`` session active in a
    second terminal.

    See more: :external+juju:ref:`Juju | juju status <command-juju-status>`
```

.. terminal::
    :input: juju status

    Model                  Controller      Cloud/Region        Version  SLA          Timestamp
    expressjs-hello-world  dev-controller  microk8s/localhost  3.6.5    unsupported  12:24:51+03:00

    App                    Version  Status  Scale  Charm                  Channel  Rev  Address        Exposed  Message
    expressjs-hello-world           active      1  expressjs-hello-world             0  10.152.183.38  no

    Unit                      Workload  Agent  Address      Ports  Message
    expressjs-hello-world/0*  active    idle   10.1.157.75

Let's expose the app using ingress. Deploy the
``nginx-ingress-integrator`` charm and integrate it with the ExpressJS app:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:deploy-nginx]
    :end-before: [docs:deploy-nginx-end]
    :dedent: 2

The hostname of the app needs to be defined so that it is accessible via
the ingress. We will also set the default route to be the root endpoint:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:config-nginx]
    :end-before: [docs:config-nginx-end]
    :dedent: 2

.. note::

>     By default, the port for the ExpressJS app should be 8080. If you want to change

Author: 3000 is the default for Express itself. In the ExpressJS paas-charm framework the default is 8080.

By previous I believe you mean the rockcraft tutorial.

>     By default, the port for the ExpressJS app should be 8080. If you want to change

Reviewer: I meant that previously in this (Charmcraft) tutorial, when we test the Express app locally, we used the 3000 port. 

I think it's worth addressing that the paas-charm framework changes the default port to 8080. Here's a suggestion (hopefully won't have any lint failures):

```
.. note::

    By default, the port for the ``expressjs-framework`` extension should be 8080.
    If you want to change
    the default port, it can be done with the configuration option ``port`` that
    will be exposed as the ``PORT`` to the Express app.
```

>     By default, the port for the ExpressJS app should be 8080. If you want to change

Author: Oh you are right, we changed the default port to 8080 to align it with other paas-charm frameworks(Go and FastAPI).

    the default port, it can be done with the configuration option ``port`` that
    will be exposed as the ``PORT`` to the Express app.

Monitor ``juju status`` until everything has a status of ``active``.

Use ``curl http://expressjs-hello-world  --resolve expressjs-hello-world:80:127.0.0.1``
to send a request via the ingress. It should return the
``Hello, world!`` greeting.

.. note::

    The ``--resolve expressjs-hello-world:80:127.0.0.1`` option to the ``curl``
    command is a way of resolving the hostname of the request without
    setting a DNS record.

Configure the Express app
--------------------

To demonstrate how to provide a configuration to the Express app,
we will make the greeting configurable. We will expect this
configuration option to be available in the Express app configuration under the
keyword ``GREETING``. Change to the ``~/expressjs-hello-world/app/routes``
directory using ``cd ../app/routes`` and replace the code into ``index.js`` with
the following:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/greeting_index.js
    :caption: ~/expressjs-hello-world/app/routes/index.js
    :language: javascript

> Increment the ``version`` in ``rockcraft.yaml`` to ``0.2`` such that the

Reviewer: To add more structure to the tutorial, I suggest:
```suggestion
Update the rock
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since we’re changing the app we should update the version of the rock.
Increment the ``version`` in ``rockcraft.yaml`` to ``0.2`` such that the
```

    name: expressjs-hello-world
    # see https://documentation.ubuntu.com/rockcraft/en/latest/explanation/bases/
    # for more information about bases and using 'bare' bases for chiselled rocks
    base: bare # as an alternative, a ubuntu base can be used
    build-base: ubuntu@24.04 # build-base is required when the base is bare
    version: '0.2' # just for humans. Semantic versioning is recommended
    summary: A summary of your ExpressJS app # 79 char long summary
    description: |
        This is expressjs-hello-world's description. You have a paragraph or two to tell the
        most important story about it. Keep it under 100 words though,
        we live in tweetspace and your description wants to look good in the
        container registries out there.
    # the platforms this rock should be built on and run on.
    # you can check your architecture with `dpkg --print-architecture`
    platforms:
        amd64:
        # arm64:
        # ppc64el:
        # s390x:

    ...

Let's pack and upload the rock:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:docker-update]
    :end-before: [docs:docker-update-end]
    :dedent: 2

> Change back into the charm directory using ``cd charm``.

Reviewer: To add more structure to the tutorial, I suggest:
```suggestion
Redeploy the charm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We’ll redeploy the new version with ``juju refresh``.

Change back into the charm directory using ``cd charm``.
```

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:change-config]
    :end-before: [docs:change-config-end]
    :dedent: 2

After we wait for a moment for the app to be restarted, using
``curl http://expressjs-hello-world  --resolve expressjs-hello-world:80:127.0.0.1``
should now return the updated ``Hi!`` greeting.

Integrate with a database
-------------------------

Now let's keep track of how many visitors your app has received.
This will require integration with a database to keep the visitor count.
This will require a few changes:

- We will need to create a database migration that creates the ``visitors`` table.
- We will need to keep track how many times the root endpoint has been called
  in the database.
- We will need to add a new endpoint to retrieve the number of visitors from
  the database.

Let's start with the database migration to create the required tables.
The charm created by the ``expressjs-framework`` extension will execute the
``migrate.sh`` script if it exists. This script should ensure that the
database is initialized and ready to be used by the app. We will
create a ``migrate.sh`` file containing this logic.

> Back out to the ``~/expressjs-hello-world/app`` directory using ``cd ../app``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Back out to the ``~/expressjs-hello-world/app`` directory.
```
Nitpick, but I don't think we need to give explicit `cd` commands to the user at this point in the tutorial :)

Create the ``migrate.sh`` file using a text editor and paste the
following code into it:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/visitors_migrate.sh
    :caption: ~/expressjs-hello-world/app/migrate.sh
    :language: bash

.. note::

    The charm will pass the Database connection string in the
    ``POSTGRESQL_DB_CONNECT_STRING`` environment variable once
    PostgreSQL has been integrated with the charm.

Change the permissions of the file ``migrate.sh`` so that it is executable:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:change-migrate-permissions]
    :end-before: [docs:change-migrate-permissions-end]
    :dedent: 2

For the migrations to work, we need the ``postgresql-client`` package
installed in the rock. By default, the ``expressjs-framework`` uses the ``bare``
base, so we will also need to install a shell interpreter. Let's do it as a
slice, so that the rock doesn't include unnecessary files. Open the
``rockcraft.yaml`` file using a text editor and add the following to the
end of the file:

> .. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/visitors_rockcraft.yaml
>     :language: yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/visitors_rockcraft.yaml
    :caption: ~/expressjs-hello-world/rockcraft.yaml
    :language: yaml
```

top of the ``rockcraft.yaml`` file looks similar to the following:

.. code-block:: yaml
    :caption: ~/expressjs-hello-world/rockcraft.yaml
    :emphasize-lines: 6

    name: expressjs-hello-world
    # see https://documentation.ubuntu.com/rockcraft/en/latest/explanation/bases/
    # for more information about bases and using 'bare' bases for chiselled rocks
    base: bare # as an alternative, a ubuntu base can be used
    build-base: ubuntu@24.04 # build-base is required when the base is bare
    version: '0.3' # just for humans. Semantic versioning is recommended
    summary: A summary of your ExpressJS app # 79 char long summary
    description: |
        This is expressjs-hello-world's description. You have a paragraph or two to tell the
        most important story about it. Keep it under 100 words though,
        we live in tweetspace and your description wants to look good in the
        container registries out there.
    # the platforms this rock should be built on and run on.
    # you can check your architecture with `dpkg --print-architecture`
    platforms:
        amd64:
        # arm64:
        # ppc64el:
        # s390x:

>     ...

Reviewer: All of these `rockcraft.yaml` changes should move to the new "Update the rock again" section

> To be able to connect to PostgreSQL from the Express app, the library
> ``pg-promise`` will be used. The app code needs to be updated to keep track of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To connect the Express app to PostgreSQL, we will use
the ``pg-promise`` library. The app code needs to be updated to keep track of
```

the number of visitors and to include a new endpoint to retrieve the
number of visitors. Create a new file called
``visitors.js`` in the ``~/expressjs-hello-world/app/routes`` directory
and paste the following code into it:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/visitors.js
    :caption: ~/expressjs-hello-world/app/routes/visitors.js
    :language: javascript

Open ``index.js`` in a text editor and
replace the code in it with the following to record the number of
visitors:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/visitors_index.js
    :caption: ~/expressjs-hello-world/app/routes/index.js
    :language: javascript

Change back to the ``~/expressjs-hello-world/app`` directory,
open ``app.js`` in a text editor and replace its content with the following
code to add the new route:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/visitors_app.js
    :caption: ~/expressjs-hello-world/app/app.js
    :language: javascript

> Add the new package in the Express project:

Reviewer: For my understanding, does the user need to be in the `~/expressjs-hello-world/app` in order for the `npm install pg-promise` command to work properly?

Author: Yes, user needs to be in the application directory (where the `package.json` is).

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:check-expressjs-app]
    :end-before: [docs:check-expressjs-app-end]
    :dedent: 2

> 
> Let's go back to the ``~/expressjs-hello-world`` directory and pack and
> upload the rock:

Reviewer: To add a bit more structure to the tutorial, I suggest:
```suggestion
Update the rock again
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let's go back to the ``~/expressjs-hello-world`` directory and pack and
upload the rock:
```

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:docker-2nd-update]
    :end-before: [docs:docker-2nd-update-end]
    :dedent: 2

> Change back into the charm directory using ``cd charm``.

Reviewer: To add a bit more structure into the tutorial, I suggest:
```suggestion
Update the charm again
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Change back into the charm directory using ``cd charm``.
```

The Express app now requires a database which needs to be declared in the
``charmcraft.yaml`` file. Open ``charmcraft.yaml`` in a text editor and
add the following section to the end of the file:

> .. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/visitors_charmcraft.yaml
>     :language: yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/visitors_charmcraft.yaml
    :caption: ~/expressjs-hello-world/charm/charmcraft.yaml
    :language: yaml
```

We can now pack and deploy the new version of the Express app:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:refresh-2nd-deployment]
    :end-before: [docs:refresh-2nd-deployment-end]
    :dedent: 2

Now let's deploy PostgreSQL and integrate it with the Express app:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:deploy-postgres]
    :end-before: [docs:deploy-postgres-end]
    :dedent: 2

Wait for ``juju status`` to show that the App is ``active`` again.
During this time, the Express app may enter a ``blocked`` state as it
waits to become integrated with the PostgreSQL database. Due to the
``optional: false`` key in the endpoint definition, the Express app will not
start until the database is ready.

> Once the Express app is ``active``, running ``curl http://expressjs-hello-world \
> --resolve expressjs-hello-world:80:127.0.0.1``
> should still return the ``Hi!`` greeting.

Reviewer: When I ran this command as it's currently written, I received the following error:
```
curl: (6) Could not resolve host: expressjs-hello-world
curl: (3) URL rejected: Malformed input to a URL function
curl: (3) URL rejected: Port number was not a decimal number between 0 and 65535
```
Therefore I suggest:
```suggestion
Once the Express app is ``active``, running ``curl http://expressjs-hello-world
--resolve expressjs-hello-world:80:127.0.0.1``
should still return the ``Hi!`` greeting.
```

.. _write-your-first-kubernetes-charm-for-a-expressjs-app:

Write your first Kubernetes charm for an Express app
======================================================

Imagine you have an Express app backed up by a database
such as PostgreSQL and need to deploy it. In a traditional setup,
this can be quite a challenge, but with Charmcraft you'll find
yourself packaging and deploying your Express app in no time.

In this tutorial we will build a Kubernetes charm for an Express
app using Charmcraft, so we can have an Express app
up and running with Juju. Let's get started!

This tutorial should take 90 minutes for you to complete.

> If you're new to the charming world, ExpressJS apps are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're new to the charming world, Express apps are
```

specifically supported with a template to quickly generate a
**rock** and a matching template to generate a **charm**.
A rock is a special kind of OCI-compliant container image, while a
charm is a software operator for cloud operations that use the Juju

> orchestration engine. The result is a ExpressJS app that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
orchestration engine. The result is an Express app that
```

can be easily deployed, configured, scaled, integrated, etc.,
on any Kubernetes cluster.

What you'll need
----------------

- A local system, e.g., a laptop, with AMD64 or ARM64 architecture which
  has sufficient resources to launch a virtual machine with 4 CPUs,
  4 GB RAM, and a 50 GB disk.
- Familiarity with Linux.

What you'll do
--------------

#. Create an Express app.
#. Use that to create a rock with Rockcraft.
#. Use that to create a charm with Charmcraft.
#. Use that to test, deploy, configure, etc., your Express app on a local
   Kubernetes cloud with Juju.
#. Repeat the process, mimicking a real development process.

.. important::

    Should you get stuck or notice issues, please get in touch on
    `Matrix <https://matrix.to/#/#12-factor-charms:ubuntu.com>`_ or
    `Discourse <https://discourse.charmhub.io/>`_

Set things up
-------------

.. include:: /reuse/tutorial/setup_edge.rst

> .. |12FactorApp| replace:: ExpressJS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. |12FactorApp| replace:: Express
```

Finally, let's create a new directory for this tutorial and
enter into it:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:create-working-dir]
    :end-before: [docs:create-working-dir-end]
    :dedent: 2

Create the Express app
-----------------

Start by creating the "Hello, world" Express app that will be
used for this tutorial.

Install ``npm`` and ``express-generator`` to initialize the Express module:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:install-init-expressjs]
    :end-before: [docs:install-init-expressjs-end]
    :dedent: 2

Run the Express app locally
----------------------

> First, install the necessary packages for the ExpressJS app so it can run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, install the necessary packages for the Express app so it can run:
```

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:build-expressjs]
    :end-before: [docs:build-expressjs-end]
    :dedent: 2

Now that we have the packages installed, let's run the Express app to verify
that it works:

.. code-block:: bash

   npm start

Test the Express app by using ``curl`` to send a request to the root
endpoint. You will need a new terminal for this; use
``multipass shell charm-dev`` to open a new terminal in Multipass:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:curl-expressjs]
    :end-before: [docs:curl-expressjs-end]
    :dedent: 2

The Express app should respond with ``Welcome to Express`` web page.

.. note::

>     The response from the ExpressJS application includes HTML and CSS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The response from the Express app includes HTML and CSS
```

    which makes it difficult to read on a terminal. You can use a browser
    to see the fully rendered page using the IP address of the VM to

>     access the ExpressJS app. You can find the IP address of the VM by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    access the Express app. You can find the IP address of the VM by
```

    running ``multipass info charm-dev`` outside of the VM. Then open
    a new tab and visit ``http://<Multipass private IP>:3000``, replacing
    ``<Multipass private IP>`` with your VM's private IP address.

> The ExpressJS app looks good, so we can stop it for now from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Express app looks good, so we can stop it for now from the
```

original terminal using :kbd:`Ctrl` + :kbd:`C`.

Pack the Express app into a rock
---------------------------

> Now let's create a container image for our ExpressJS app. We'll use a rock,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's create a container image for our Express app. We'll use a rock,
```

which is an OCI-compliant container image based on Ubuntu.

First, we'll need a ``rockcraft.yaml`` project file. We'll take advantage of a
pre-defined extension in Rockcraft with the ``--profile`` flag that caters
initial rock files for specific web app frameworks. Using the
``expressjs-framework`` profile, Rockcraft automates the creation of

> ``rockcraft.yaml`` and tailors the file for an ExpressJS app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``rockcraft.yaml`` and tailors the file for an Express app.
```

    # for more information about bases and using 'bare' bases for chiselled rocks
    base: bare # as an alternative, a ubuntu base can be used
    build-base: ubuntu@24.04 # build-base is required when the base is bare
    version: '0.1' # just for humans. Semantic versioning is recommended
    summary: A summary of your ExpressJS app # 79 char long summary
    description: |
        This is expressjs-hello-world's description. You have a paragraph or two to tell the
        most important story about it. Keep it under 100 words though,
        we live in tweetspace and your description wants to look good in the
        container registries out there.
    # the platforms this rock should be built on and run on.
    # you can check your architecture with `dpkg --print-architecture`
    platforms:
        amd64:
        # arm64:
        # ppc64el:
        # s390x:

    ...

Verfiy that the ``name`` is ``expressjs-hello-world``.

Ensure that ``platforms`` includes the architecture of your host. Check
the architecture of your system:

.. code-block:: bash

    dpkg --print-architecture

Edit the ``platforms`` key in ``rockcraft.yaml`` if required.

> Edit the ``platforms`` key in ``rockcraft.yaml`` if required.

Reviewer: One of these lines should be removed so that it's not repeated twice in the tutorial :)

Now let's pack the rock:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:pack]
    :end-before: [docs:pack-end]
    :dedent: 2

.. note::

    ``ROCKCRAFT_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_EXTENSIONS`` is required while the Express
    extension is experimental.

Depending on your system and network, this step can take several

> minutes to finish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
minutes to finish.

.. admonition:: For more options when packing rocks

    See the :external+rockcraft:ref:`ref_commands_pack` command reference.
```
To match the other tutorials

Once Rockcraft has finished packing the Express rock,
the terminal will respond with something similar to
``Packed expressjs-hello-world_0.1_<architecture>.rock``.
The file name reflects your system's architecture. After
the initial pack, subsequent rock packings are faster.

The rock needs to be copied to the MicroK8s registry, which stores OCI
archives so they can be downloaded and deployed in the Kubernetes cluster.
Copy the rock:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:skopeo-copy]
    :end-before: [docs:skopeo-copy-end]

>     :dedent: 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :dedent: 2

This command contains the following pieces:

- ``--insecure-policy``: adopts a permissive policy that
  removes the need for a dedicated policy file.
- ``--dest-tls-verify=false``: disables the need for HTTPS
  and verify certificates while interacting with the MicroK8s registry.
- ``oci-archive``: specifies the rock we created for our Express app.
- ``docker``: specifies the name of the image in the MicroK8s registry.
```
To match the other tutorials

    name: expressjs-hello-world

    type: charm

    base: ubuntu@24.04

    # the platforms this charm should be built on and run on.
    # you can check your architecture with `dpkg --print-architecture`
    platforms:
      amd64:
      # arm64:
      # ppc64el:
      # s390x:

    # (Required)
    summary: A very short one-line summary of the ExpressJS app.

    ...

Verify that the ``name`` is ``expressjs-hello-world``. Ensure that ``platforms``
includes the architecture of your host. Edit the ``platforms`` key in the
project file if required.

Let's pack the charm:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:charm-pack]
    :end-before: [docs:charm-pack-end]
    :dedent: 2

.. note::

    ``CHARMCRAFT_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_EXTENSIONS`` is required while the ExpressJS
    extension is experimental.

Depending on your system and network, this step can take several
minutes to finish.

Once Charmcraft has finished packing the charm, the terminal will
respond with something similar to
``Packed expressjs-hello-world_ubuntu-24.04-<architecture>.charm``.
The file name reflects your system's architecture. After the initial

> pack, subsequent charm packings are faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pack, subsequent charm packings are faster.

.. admonition:: For more options when packing charms

    See the :literalref:`pack<ref_commands_pack>` command reference.
```

    version: '0.2' # just for humans. Semantic versioning is recommended
    summary: A summary of your ExpressJS app # 79 char long summary
    description: |
        This is expressjs-hello-world's description. You have a paragraph or two to tell the
        most important story about it. Keep it under 100 words though,
        we live in tweetspace and your description wants to look good in the
        container registries out there.
    # the platforms this rock should be built on and run on.
    # you can check your architecture with `dpkg --print-architecture`
    platforms:
        amd64:
        # arm64:
        # ppc64el:
        # s390x:

    ...

Let's pack and upload the rock:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:docker-update]
    :end-before: [docs:docker-update-end]
    :dedent: 2

Redeploy the charm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We’ll redeploy the new version with ``juju refresh``.

Change back into the charm directory using ``cd charm``.

The ``expressjs-framework`` Charmcraft extension supports adding configurations
to ``charmcraft.yaml``, which will be passed as environment variables to

> the ExpressJS app. Add the following to the end of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Express app. Add the following to the end of the
```

Initialize a charm named ``expressjs-hello-world``:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:charm-init]
    :end-before: [docs:charm-init-end]
    :dedent: 2

The files will automatically be created in your working directory.

Check out the contents of ``charmcraft.yaml``:

.. code-block:: bash

    cat charmcraft.yaml

The top of the file should look similar to the following snippet:

.. code-block:: yaml
    :caption: ~/expressjs-hello-world/charm/charmcraft.yaml

    # This file configures Charmcraft.
    # See https://juju.is/docs/sdk/charmcraft-config for guidance.

    name: expressjs-hello-world

    type: charm

    base: ubuntu@24.04

    # the platforms this charm should be built on and run on.
    # you can check your architecture with `dpkg --print-architecture`
    platforms:
      amd64:
      # arm64:
      # ppc64el:
      # s390x:

    # (Required)
    summary: A very short one-line summary of the ExpressJS app.

    ...

Verify that the ``name`` is ``expressjs-hello-world``. Ensure that ``platforms``
includes the architecture of your host. Edit the ``platforms`` key in the
project file if required.

> Let's pack the charm:
> 
> .. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
>     :language: bash
>     :start-after: [docs:charm-pack]
>     :end-before: [docs:charm-pack-end]
>     :dedent: 2
> 
> .. note::
> 
>     ``CHARMCRAFT_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_EXTENSIONS`` is required while the ExpressJS
>     extension is experimental.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's pack the charm. Because the Express profile is in development, we also need to
enable experimental extensions for Charmcraft:

.. literalinclude:: code/expressjs/task.yaml
    :language: bash
    :start-after: [docs:charm-pack]
    :end-before: [docs:charm-pack-end]
    :dedent: 2
```

.. _write-your-first-kubernetes-charm-for-a-expressjs-app:

Write your first Kubernetes charm for an Express app
======================================================

Imagine you have an Express app backed up by a database
such as PostgreSQL and need to deploy it. In a traditional setup,
this can be quite a challenge, but with Charmcraft you'll find
yourself packaging and deploying your Express app in no time.

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```
